The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sabbath-Breaking on the Canal, by Rev. John
Clutton


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Sabbath-Breaking on the Canal
       A Poem


Author: Rev. John Clutton



Release Date: May 16, 2020  [eBook #62143]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SABBATH-BREAKING ON THE CANAL***


Transcribed from the [1820?] Parry and Son edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                      [Picture: Public domain cover]





                             SABBATH-BREAKING
                              ON THE CANAL.


                                 A POEM.

                                * * * * *

                    BY THE REVEREND JOHN CLUTTON, A.M.
                         PREBENDARY OF HEREFORD.

                                * * * * *

       _Respectfully dedicated to the Reverend John Davies_, _A.M._
                 _Rector of St. Clement’s_, _Worcester_.

                                * * * * *

      WHILE COMMERCE, crown’d with wealth, extends her reign,
   The Sons of labour swell her length’ning train;
   O’er hill and dale she forms the winding road,
   Where the slow team scarce drags the pond’rous load;
   She digs the deep Canal; with ease the horse
   Draws massive cargoes on the humid course;
   Her various stores she hastens to impart,
   And for her treasures finds a ready mart.

      Ye Sons of labour, hail! your hardy hands
   With plenty decorate our smiling lands;
   The jetty ore that feeds the cheerful flame,
   The freighted vessels, still your toil proclaim:
   From distant lands the tide of Commerce flows,
   And weighty burdens on your shoulders throws;
   The general weal your anxious cares promote,
   But few your never-ceasing toils will note,
   Hard toils exacted on the Sabbath days;
   Ah! thus ye wander from God’s holy ways:
   To heav’n ascends the cry of your distress,
   And may the King of heav’n your wrongs redress.

      Yon bark, that sails the flowery bank beside,
   Contains a soul for which the Saviour died,
   Which in the heights of heav’n, or depths of hell,
   Is destin’d through eternity to dwell:
   The Sabbath smiles; but, bound with Satan’s chain,
   On Mammon’s slave the Sabbath smiles in vain:
   The bells that utter their melodious chime
   Each Sabbath day, at morning’s hour of prime,
   Convey no music to the boatman’s ear,
   Intent his course towards ruin’s gulph to steer;
   Still on the Sacred Day his bark he plies,
   Nor stops to worship Him who rules the skies.
   Will none commiserate his hapless case,
   Nor bid him seek Jehovah’s saving grace?
   “In Zion woe to them that are at ease” {2a}
   Denounc’d the prophet; who themselves would please.
   “The plague, the famine, noisome beasts, the sword,” {2b}
   These are the judgments of th’ offended Lord.
   Think not the great Jehovah sleeps supine,
   Sooner yon radiant orb shall cease to shine:
   For broken Sabbaths clouds of wrath will lower,
   And who can stay “the thunder of his power?”
   But judgment is the Lord’s unwonted deed,
   Unwillingly He makes the sinner bleed:
   The door of Mercy still is open found,
   To penitence and pardon calls abound.

      Turn, then, ye Sabbath-breakers, quickly turn,
   Your Saviour’s offer now no longer spurn;
   Your heav’nly Intercessor takes his stand,
   Above all angels, at the Lord’s right hand;
   Before His face with lowliest rev’rence fall,
   Believe that “Jesus Christ is Lord of all,” {3}
   And seek for grace t’ establish this belief;
   Eternity is long, our lives are brief;
   From such belief will prompt obedience flow,
   As from the root the stem and branches grow;
   Thus on your heads will choicest gifts descend,
   For those that serve Him will the Lord befriend.

      Where Weaver pours her tribute in the main,
   The rest Sabbatic cheers the drooping swain;
   A wat’ry track full many a league extends,
   Where the strong oar the hardy boatman bends;
   Trade’s empire there let Fancy’s eye explore,
   Where Sunday labour harrows man no more.
   ’Tis said (and I believe the wondrous tale)
   When the sixth Night hath spread her shadowy veil,
   Soon as from yonder venerable tower
   Time’s iron tongue proclaims the midnight hour,
   Clos’d are the locks throughout the wat’ry way,
   And clos’d remain upon Jehovah’s day;
   Faith, Hope, and Charity their powers combin’d
   This rest to purchase for the weary hind.
   How chang’d the scene since He who reigns above
   Drew to Himself men’s hearts “with bands of love!”
   Where erst arose fierce hell-engender’d strife,
   And all the vices that embitter life,
   Peace o’er the land her olive branch extends,
   And prayer from many a heart to heav’n ascends.
   Where at the lock the swelling waters rise
   Men now obey the Sovereign of the skies:
   The angry menace, and the oath profane,
   Passions uncheck’d by sober Reason’s rein,
   All now are hush’d; for Sin no more holds sway,
   No longer makes immortal souls his prey;
   His warmth “the Sun of righteousness” imparts,
   And Faith takes root in their regen’rate hearts.
   Since oft, ’tis said, Example’s beauteous light,
   When precepts fail, allures to actions right,
   So may we hope that other tribes will know
   What numerous blessings from obedience flow;
   For they that hallow God’s peculiar Day
   Will find Him still their Guardian and their Stay:
   Who for Christ’s sake have earthly stores resign’d
   A sacred never-fading bliss will find.

      Happy, thrice happy he whom heav’nly grace
   Taught to forsake a soul-ensnaring race,
   Firm Jonathan; {4} who spurn’d the proffer’d wealth,
   Glad to secure his soul’s eternal health;
   Untutor’d he to read God’s Book, or write,
   Still in Jehovah’s law he found delight;
   Nor dar’d the holy Sabbath to profane
   By grasping greedily at filthy gain;
   He “sleeps in Jesus,” {5a} and through endless days
   Will rise to hymn his mighty Maker’s praise:
   Few are his followers; for love of gold
   Enchains the mind with adamantine fold.
   Ah! wretched he who makes, from morn till night,
   The ledger, not the Bible, his delight;
   Whose coffer with the stores of Mammon bursts,
   Whose mind for heav’nly treasures never thirsts;
   Thus let him think while days of Mercy shine,
   And inwardly digest this truth divine;—
   Wealthy can he be styl’d who gains “the world” {5b}
   If after death “his soul” to hell be hurl’d?
   Say, for what sum can one exchange “his soul,”
   Destin’d to live while endless ages roll?

      Of liberty we boast, and loudly cry,
   While triumph laughs in each expressive eye,
   “On British ground whoever treads is free,
   The happiest isle embosom’d in the sea!”
   And yet e’en here, in this our favour’d land,
   Full many a form the marks of bondage brand;
   For Satan, lording o’er a host of slaves,
   Their way to hell by Sabbath-breaking paves.

      But some bold spirits, led by grace divine,
   In wisdom’s path advancing, brightly shine;
   Some hoary-headed boatmen oft declare
   “No Sabbath saw them to their toils repair;”
   Grateful to God who thus our race hath blest,
   They held their right t’ enjoy Sabbatic rest;
   And sweet their converse to the Christian’s ear
   Who learn’d betimes Jehovah’s name to fear.
   “I left my master,” {6a} thus declar’d a youth,
   (And Charity presumes he told the truth)
   “I left my master, and disdain’d his hire,
   For Sunday’s toil was his profane desire.”
   “Give God the praise,” the heav’n-taught Pastor cries,
   “God gave the will, and He the strength supplies;
   Nor doubt that He who feeds the raven’s brood
   To you will raiment give, and daily food:
   Who Christ’s reproach with Christian patience bear
   A crown of everlasting life will wear.”

      Jehovah bids us serve Him, and rejoice;
   But Satan utters a discordant voice:
   Anxious to keep the Lord’s peculiar Day,
   A boatman found this hindrance in his way;
   “If Sunday’s work you stubbornly refuse
   Bread and your raiment you shall quickly lose;”
   So spake a master with triumphant tone,
   Deeming the man beneath the scourge would groan.
   “Better, far better,” was the just reply
   Of one who fear’d the Ruler of the sky,
   “That no bread now should cheer my gloomy cell
   Than to _want water_ in the flames of _hell_!”
   And other souls have sought their Maker’s face, {6b}
   Pluck’d from the fire, as brands, by sovereign grace.
   Who comes to Christ, though sinful and obscure,
   Takes refuge in a Rock for ever sure;
   He asks in faith, and every prayer preferr’d
   In Jesus’ holy name the Lord hath heard.

      O Thou, whose reign extends o’er earth and sky,
   Enthron’d between the Cherubim on high,
   Before Thy face “all nations nothing” {7a} seem,
   “And less” than nought the universe we deem;
   At Thy command, O Sovereign Lord of all,
   A nation rises, or is doom’d to fall;
   Forsaking Thee, men rue their crimes too late
   When justice drives them to their bitter fate:
   Assist Thy servants in this sacred cause,
   Teaching obedience to Thy holy laws;
   To sinful tribes Thy heav’nly grace impart,
   Remove “the stony,” “give” the fleshly “heart:” {7b}
   Dispose us still to hallow, Lord, Thy days,
   And zealously promote Thy glorious praise.
   O Lord, arise, and view a race opprest
   Compell’d to toil on days of holy rest:
   In Egypt’s land Thy wonder-working rod
   Made Pharaoh fear the majesty of God;
   “That they may serve Me, let My people go;” {7c}
   “That I am Lord, heav’n, earth, and hell shall know;” {7d}
   To Egypt’s King this message Moses brought,
   And ten tremendous plagues by Thee were wrought;
   At length from Pharaoh’s house of bondage free,
   Thy people march’d, triumphant, through the sea;
   The roaring waves o’erwhelm’d th’ Egyptian host,
   And Israel sung Thy praises on the coast:
   So now save sinners from their ghostly foe,
   On captive souls Thy Spirit’s aid bestow;
   To each benighted wand’rer light convey,
   Point out “the narrow” heav’n-directed “way;”
   Each Sabbath free them from their worldly care,
   And to Thy temple bid them oft repair;
   Teach them to view, with faith, their Saviour’s cross,
   Whose death redeems them from eternal loss;
   Whose blood can cleanse their souls from ev’ry sin,
   Through whom alone heav’n’s mansions they may win:
   And when at last th’ Archangel’s trump we hear,
   And round Thy throne all nations shall appear,
   O may we rise to Thy Cherubic band,
   Call’d by our heav’nly Judge to His right hand,
   To hear His blessing, and His glory see
   Throughout the ages of eternity;
   With joy uplifting our victorious palms,
   Hymning His matchless praise with holy psalms,
   Thus an eternal Sabbath may we keep,
   “One Shepherd” reigning o’er “one fold” {8} of sheep.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

        _Parry and Son_, _Printers_, _Eastgate Street_, _Chester_.




FOOTNOTES.


{2a}  Amos vi. 1.

{2b}  Ezekiel xiv. 21.

{3}  Acts x. 36.

{4}  See the history of Jonathan Brown, the Bargeman, written by the Rev.
Dr. Calamy; Religious Tract Society, No. 131; price 1d.

{5a}  1 Thess. iv. 14.

{5b}  Matthew xvi. 26.

{6a}  The circumstances here recorded actually occurred.

{6b}  See the substance of a lecture on the spiritual state of the
watermen, by the Rev. J. Davies; sold by Seeley, 169, Fleet Street,
London, price 7d.

{7a}  Isaiah xl. 17.

{7b}  Ezekiel xxxvi. 26.

{7c}  Ex. viii. 1.

{7d}  Ex. vii. 17.

{8}  John x. 16.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SABBATH-BREAKING ON THE CANAL***


******* This file should be named 62143-0.txt or 62143-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/2/1/4/62143


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

