*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 65572 ***

                                  The
                                New York
                               Cake Book:


                             Fifty Recipes

                                   By
                        A Famous New York Chef.


                               New York:
                        C. A. Montgomery & Co.,
                                 1904.

                            Copyright, 1904,
                                   by
                         C. A. Montgomery & Co.

    [Illustration: Page header]




                           General Directions
                                  for
                              Making Cake.


It is absolutely essential to the making of good cake that the materials
should be good; the flour must be white and dry, and carefully sifted
before using; the sugar white and free from lumps; the eggs above
suspicion; the butter sweet and fresh, and the milk whole or unskimmed.
It is hardly less important that the measuring and weighing should be
accurate throughout, and that each step in the process of mixing should
be rightly taken. The flour, as we have said, should be sifted _before_
measuring, and if damp dried thoroughly. The eggs should be beaten
separately,—the whites in a cool room till they are solid enough to
slice. The milk may be used either sour or sweet, but the two must never
be mixed; sour milk makes spongy cake, sweet makes it more solid. The
soda should be thoroughly dissolved in hot water and strained before it
is stirred into cake. Currants should be carefully rinsed, rubbed in a
dry cloth to get out the stems, and then spread on platters and dried,
before being used. Almonds should be blanched, by pouring boiling water
on them; drain and repeat the process and they will readily pop from the
skin; when blanched, dry and then pound them fine with a few drops of
milk, to prevent their oiling. All kinds of cake that are made without
yeast are better for being stirred till just before they are baked. When
ready to mix, stir the butter to a cream, then add the sugar, and stir
till white; next beat the yolks of the eggs, strain them and add them to
the sugar and butter; meantime another person should beat the whites to
a stiff froth and put them in; then add the spices and flour, and last
of all the fruit, if any be used. Earthenware is best to mix in, and a
wooden spoon should be used. Butter the cake pans well; the cake will be
less liable to burn if the pans are lined with white buttered paper. The
oven should be “quick” but not furiously hot; if it be slow the cake
will not rise properly. The cake must not, while baking, be moved, or
changed from one oven to another, and if it browns too rapidly on top,
cover it over with a piece of white buttered paper. To find out when it
is baked enough, half open the oven door, and try the center of the loaf
with a clean broom-straw. If the cake is baked the straw will come out
dry; if not, a little of the batter will adhere to it, in which case the
door of the oven must be closed immediately or the cake will fall. Cake
that is to be frosted should be baked in pans with sides perpendicular,
instead of slanting. It should be iced as soon as taken from the oven,
to insure its drying quickly and smoothly. As soon as the cake is cool,
wrap it in a thick white cloth, and keep it in a covered earthen jar or
tight tin box. Do not cut more at a time than is likely to be used.

    [Illustration: Decorative page footer]




                             _Almond Cake._


_Take_: Sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ¼ lb.; flour, 1 lb.; eggs, 8; almonds, 1
coffee-cupful; essence of bitter almonds, ½ teaspoonful.

Stir one pound of powdered sugar and a quarter of a pound of butter to a
cream; beat up the eight eggs, the whites and yolks separately, and add
the yolks to the butter and sugar; stir together very thoroughly, and
then put in one pound of flour; add a coffee-cupful of sweet almonds
blanched, and beat to a smooth paste, with half a teaspoonful of essence
of bitter almonds; along with the almonds stir in the whites of the
eggs. Bake in a quick oven, and frost it as soon as it is done. Season
the icing with rose-water.




                            _Caraway Cakes._


_Take_: Flour, 2 qts.; white sugar, 1 qt.; butter, 1 tea-cupful; caraway
seeds, ½ gill; essence of lemon, 1 teaspoonful; milk, to make a dough
that may be rolled.

Stir one quart of powdered white sugar and a tea-cupful of butter to a
cream; add two quarts of flour, half a gill of caraway seed, and a
teaspoonful of essence of lemon; make into a dough, roll out into a
sheet half an inch thick, cut into square cakes, and crimp the edges.
Then bake in a tolerably quick oven.




                           _Chocolate Cake._


_Take_: Flour, 3½ cupfuls; butter, 1 cupful; sugar, 2 cupfuls; eggs, 5;
milk, 1 cupful; cream-tartar, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ½ teaspoonful; fine
white sugar, 1½ cupfuls; grated chocolate, 3 tablespoonfuls; essence of
vanilla, 1 teaspoonful.

Mix one cup of butter; two cups of sugar; yolks of five eggs and whites
of two; three and a half cups of flour, into which one teaspoonful of
cream-tartar has been stirred; one cup of milk, and half a teaspoonful
of soda. Bake in jelly-cake tins, and use the following mixture for
spreading between layers and on top: One and a half cups of sugar; the
remaining whites of three eggs; three tablespoonfuls of grated
chocolate, and one teaspoonful of essence of vanilla; beat well.




                            _Cocoanut Cake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Flour, 4 cupfuls; sugar, 3 cupfuls; butter, 1 cupful; soda, 1
teaspoonful; cream-tartar, 2 teaspoonfuls; grated cocoanut, 3 cupfuls;
eggs, whites of 3; lemon, grated rind of 1.

Mix together three cupfuls of sugar; one of butter; the whites of three
eggs; a level teaspoonful of soda; four cupfuls of flour, with two
teaspoonfuls of cream-tartar sifted into it; three cupfuls of grated
cocoanut; the grated rind of one lemon, and a gill of milk. Stir
thoroughly, and bake in a moderate oven.




                            _Cocoanut Cake._
                        Recipe No. 2. (Sponge.)


_Take_: Flour, ½ pt.; grated cocoanut, 1; white sugar, 1 pt.; eggs, 6;
salt, ½ teaspoonful.

Stir together a pint of fine white sugar, and the yolks of six eggs,
beaten and strained; add one cocoanut (grated), and half a teaspoonful
of salt, and the juice of half a fresh lemon; just before the cake is
put into the oven, add the whites of the six eggs beaten up stiff, and
then stir in half a pint of flour. Stir the flour in only just enough to
mix it; then put the cake in pans lined with buttered paper, and bake in
a quick oven. Do not let the top harden quickly; if there is danger of
it, cover with buttered paper.




                            _Cocoanut Cake._
                             Recipe No. 3.


_Take_: Sugar, 1½ cupfuls; butter, ½ cupful; eggs, 3; milk, ½ cupful;
flour, 2 cupfuls; cream-tartar, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ¼ teaspoonful;
cocoanut, 1; fine white sugar, 1½ cupfuls.

Stir one and a half cupfuls of sugar and half a cupful of butter to a
cream; beat up three eggs and add them, together with half a cupful of
new milk; then add two cupfuls of flour into which a teaspoonful of
cream-tartar and a quarter of a teaspoonful of soda have been sifted.
Stir together well, and bake in jelly-cake tins. Mix one cocoanut
(grated) and its milk with a cupful and a half of white sugar; set this
in the oven till the sugar melts, and spread between the layers of cake.




                           _Cocoanut Cakes._


_Take_: Grated cocoanut, 1 lb.; white sugar, 1 lb.; eggs, whites of 6.

Take a pound each of powdered white sugar and grated cocoanut (the brown
part of the cocoanut should be cut off before grating it); add the
whites of half a dozen eggs beaten to a stiff froth. There should be
just enough eggs to moisten to a stiff paste. Drop this mixture on
buttered plates in “dabs” the size of a twenty-five-cent piece and
several inches apart, and bake immediately in a moderately warm oven,
watching constantly to keep them from scorching.




                             _Coffee Cake._


_Take_: Flour, 2½ lbs.; brown sugar, 9 oz.; butter, 14 oz.; molasses, 1
pt.; cold strong coffee, 1 pt.; stoned raisins, cut in two, 2½ lbs.;
citron, 1 lb.; mace, cinnamon, and ginger, 2 teaspoonfuls each; cloves
and allspice, 1 teaspoonful each; soda, dissolved in a little of the
coffee, 2 even teaspoonfuls.

Rub the sugar and butter together, add the molasses, coffee and flour
alternately, leaving a pint of flour in which to rub the fruit, then the
soda, and lastly the fruit. Bake slowly about an hour.




                           _Cornstarch Cake._


_Take_: Sugar, 2 cupfuls; butter, 1 cupful; milk, 1 cupful; eggs, 3;
soda, 1 teaspoonful; flour, 2 cupfuls; cornstarch, 1 cupful;
cream-tartar, 2 teaspoonfuls.

Stir two cupfuls of sugar and one of butter to a cream; add one cup of
milk, three eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, and one
teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in a little hot water; then stir in two
cupfuls of flour, and one cupful of cornstarch, with two teaspoonfuls of
cream-tartar sifted through them. Bake in small tins, and eat fresh.




                             _Cream Cake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Sugar, ¾ lb.; butter, ½ lb.; eggs, 7; flour, 1½ lbs.; nutmeg, 1;
cream, ½ pt.

Take half a pound of butter and three quarters of a pound of sugar, and
stir together till very white; beat seven eggs, the whites and yolks
separately, and stir them into the cake, then add a grated nutmeg, and a
pound and a half of sifted flour; just before putting it into the pans,
add half a pint of sweet cream, and a pound of seeded raisins. Bake in a
quick oven.




                             _Cream Cake._
                     Recipe No. 2. (Without Eggs.)


_Take_: Sugar, 3 cupfuls; butter, 1 cupful; flour, 4 cupfuls; soda, 1½
teaspoonfuls; essence of lemon, 1 teaspoonful; nutmeg, ½ (grated); sour
cream, 2 cupfuls.

Stir three cups of sugar and one of butter together thoroughly; add two
cupfuls of sour cream, one and a half teaspoonfuls of soda dissolved in
a little cold water, a teaspoonful of essence of lemon, and half a
grated nutmeg; pour all this into the middle of four cupfuls of flour.
Mix together quickly and thoroughly, and bake at once.




                              _Cup Cake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Sugar, 2 cupfuls; butter, 1 cupful; eggs, 4; flour, 3 cupfuls;
baking powder, 1 teaspoonful; essence of almond, to taste.

Beat one cup of butter and two of sugar to cream; then add four eggs,
whites and yolks beaten separately, and three cupfuls of flour; flavor
with almond to taste, and at last, just before putting into the oven,
add one teaspoonful of baking powder. Bake in a quick oven, either in
cups or pans.




                              _Cup Cake._
                             Recipe No. 2.


_Take_: Sugar, 3 teacupfuls; butter, 1½ cupfuls; eggs, 3; flour, 6
cupfuls; essence of lemon, or rose-water, to taste; soda, 1 teaspoonful;
milk, 1 cupful.

Stir three teacupfuls of sugar and one and a half of butter to a cream;
beat three eggs to a froth, and stir them into the sugar and butter,
together with three cupfuls of flour; flavor to taste with essence of
lemon or rose-water. Dissolve a teaspoonful of soda in a cupful of milk,
strain it into the cake, and then add three more cupfuls of flour, with
three teaspoonfuls of cream-tartar. Mix well, and bake immediately
either in cups or pans.




                            _Currant Cake._


_Take_: Flour, 1 lb.; butter, ½ lb.; sugar, ¾ lb.; currants, ½ lb.;
eggs, 4; cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ½ teaspoonful; ½ a lemon.

Mix together one pound of flour, half a pound of butter, three quarters
of a pound of sugar, half a pound of currants (well washed), four eggs,
one teaspoonful of cinnamon, half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in hot
water, half a lemon (squeezed and the rind grated). Line the bake-pans
with buttered paper; drop the mixture upon it, and bake quickly.




                            _Delicate Cake._


_Take_: Butter, 1 cupful; sugar, 2 cupfuls; milk, 1 cupful; eggs, whites
of 5; cream-tartar, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ½ teaspoonful; flour, 3
cupfuls.

Stir one cupful of butter and two of sugar to a cream; add one cupful of
milk, the whites of five eggs, one teaspoonful of cream-tartar, half a
teaspoonful of soda, and three cupfuls of sifted flour. (The yolks of
the eggs can be used for other purposes).




                             _Fancy Cakes._


_Take_: Sugar, ½ lb.; eggs, 4; flour, ½ lb.; essence of lemon, 1
teaspoonful.

Beat half a pound of sugar and the yolks of four eggs together; add half
a pound of flour, and beat up _thoroughly_; then add a teaspoonful of
essence of lemon, and the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth.
Bake in small patties, and put a sugar-plum on the top of each.




                             _Fruit Cake._


_Take_: White sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ¾ lb.; eggs, 7; flour, 1 lb.;
citron, ¼ lb.; nutmeg, 1 teaspoonful; cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful; currants,
½ lb.; raisins, ½ lb.

Beat one pound of fine white sugar and three quarters of a pound of
butter to a cream; add the yolks of seven eggs, beaten to a froth; then
the whites of the eggs, whipped to a froth, and a quarter of a pound of
citron, one teaspoonful of nutmeg, one of cinnamon, and one pound of
flour; stir together, and add half a pound of currants, washed carefully
and dredged, and half a pound of raisins, seeded and chopped. Mix
thoroughly, and bake in a moderately quick oven.




                             _Gingerbread._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Sugar, ½ lb.; butter, ½ lb.; flour, 2 lbs.; caraway seed, 1 oz.;
ground ginger, 1 oz.; coriander seed, ½ oz.; molasses, 1¾ lbs.

Rub together half a pound of fine sugar and half a pound of butter; then
add two pounds of flour, well dried by the fire, one ounce of caraway
seed, one ounce of ground ginger, and half an ounce of coriander seed.
Mix them with one and three quarter pounds of molasses, roll thin, and
bake in a quick oven.




                             _Gingerbread._
                        Recipe No. 2. (Fleming.)


_Take_: Butter and sugar, ¼ lb. each; molasses, ½ pt.; eggs, 4; flour,
1½ pts.; ground ginger, 1 tablespoonful; cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful; soda,
1 teaspoonful.

Stir together a quarter pound each of butter and brown sugar; add half a
pint of molasses. Beat four eggs to a froth, and stir them into the
mixture alternately with a scant pint and a half of flour; add a heaping
tablespoonful of ground ginger, and a teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon.
Stir together well. Dissolve a level teaspoonful of soda in two
tablespoonfuls of warm water, and stir this in last. Put the mixture
into a buttered tin pan, set at once in brisk (not too hot) oven and
bake well. Test with a straw.




                             _Gingerbread._
                         Recipe No. 3. (Hard.)


_Take_: Molasses, 1 pt.; butter, ½ lb.; sour milk, 1 teacupful; ground
ginger, 2 tablespoonfuls; soda, 1 tablespoonful; cloves, 1
tablespoonful; lemon, rind of 1; flour.

Mix one pint of molasses, half a pound of butter, one cupful of sour
milk, two tablespoonfuls of ginger, one tablespoonful of soda, one
tablespoonful of cloves, the rind of one lemon (grated), and flour
enough to make a stiff paste. Butter the tin sheets, roll the dough on
them, sprinkle lightly with sugar as thin as possible, and bake in a
quick oven.




                             _Gingerbread._
                         Recipe No. 4. (Soft.)


_Take_: Butter, 1 teacupful, melted; molasses, 1 pt.; ground ginger, 1
tablespoonful; flour, 1 pt.; eggs, 2; soda, 2 teaspoonfuls; sour milk, ½
pt.; flour; lemon peel.

Mix a teacupful of melted butter with a pint of molasses, a
tablespoonful of ground ginger, a pint of flour, and two beaten eggs; a
fresh lemon peel, cut into strips, may be added. Mix two teaspoonfuls of
soda in half a pint of sour milk, stir it into the cake, and add flour
enough to make soft sponge. Bake in deep pans, in a moderately quick
oven, about half an hour.




                             _Gingerbread._
                        Recipe No. 5. (Spiced.)


_Take_: Sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ½ lb.; eggs, 5; milk, 3 tablespoonfuls;
cream-tartar, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ½ teaspoonful; ground ginger, 1
tablespoonful; flour, 1 lb.; cloves, nutmeg, cinnamon, teaspoonful each.

Stir one pound of sugar and half a pound of butter to a cream; add five
eggs beaten to a froth, three tablespoonfuls of sweet milk, one
teaspoonful of cream-tartar, half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a
little hot water, a heaping tablespoonful of ground ginger, and one
teaspoonful each of cloves, nutmeg, and cinnamon; mix together well and
add one pound of flour. (This amount will make two good-sized loaves.)




                             _Gingerbread._
                        Recipe No. 6. (Sponge.)


_Take_: Molasses, 1 cupful; butter, ½ cupful; ginger, 1 tablespoonful;
sour milk, 1 cupful; soda 1½ teaspoonfuls; flour.

Mix a cupful of molasses, half a cupful of butter, and one tablespoonful
of ginger, and set it on the fire till well warmed; then add one cupful
of sour milk, one teaspoonful and a half of soda and enough flour to
make a stiff sponge. Bake at once in a rather quick oven.




                            _Ginger Snaps._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Butter, ½ lb.; brown sugar, ¼ lb.; molasses, 1 pt.; ginger, 2
tablespoonfuls; flour, 1 qt.; soda, 2 teaspoonfuls; milk, 1
wine-glassful.

Take half a pound of butter, melt and mix with a quarter of a pound of
brown sugar, a pint of molasses, two tablespoonfuls of ground ginger,
and a quart of flour. Dissolve two teaspoonfuls of soda in a wine-glass
of milk, strain it into the cake, and add sufficient flour to make a
soft dough. Roll it out thin, cut into small cakes, and bake them in a
quick oven.




                            _Ginger Snaps._
                             Recipe No. 2.


_Take_: Butter, 1 cupful; sugar, 1 cupful; molasses, 1 cupful; water, ½
cupful; ground ginger, cinnamon, and cloves, 1 tablespoonful each; soda,
1 teaspoonful; flour.

Mix a cupful of butter with one heaping cupful of sugar, one cupful of
molasses, half a cupful of cold water, one tablespoonful each ground
ginger and cinnamon, one teaspoonful of cloves, one of soda dissolved in
hot water, and enough flour to make a pretty stiff dough. Roll out thin,
and bake at once.




                             _Golden Cake._


_Take_: White sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ¾ lb.; eggs, yolks of 16; flour, 2
lbs.; milk, 1 cupful; lemon, 1; mace; baking powder.

Mix together one pound of fine white sugar, three quarters of a pound of
butter, the yolks of sixteen eggs, the rind and juice of one lemon, one
cupful of milk, and two pounds of flour, with two teaspoonfuls of baking
powder; season to taste with mace. Bake about half an hour.




                          _Huckleberry Cake._


_Take_: Sugar, 1 cupful; molasses, 1 cupful; milk, 1 cupful; butter, ½
cupful; cream-tartar, 1½ teaspoonfuls; soda, 1 teaspoonful; flour;
huckleberries, 1 pt.; allspice, cinnamon, and cloves.

Beat together one cup of sugar, one of molasses, one of milk, half a cup
of butter, one teaspoonful and a half of cream-tartar, one teaspoonful
of soda dissolved in a little warm water; stir in enough flour to make a
soft sponge, and then add one pint of huckleberries, washed and dredged;
season to taste with allspice, cinnamon, and cloves.




                             _Jelly Cake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ½ lb.; milk, 1 cupful; eggs, 6;
cream-tartar, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ½ teaspoonful; flour, 1 lb.; jelly.

Stir to a light cream one pound of sugar and half a pound of butter; add
one cupful of milk, six eggs beaten to a froth, one teaspoonful of
cream-tartar, half a teaspoonful of soda, and one pound of flour. Spread
over buttered tins to the thickness of a quarter of an inch, bake till
brown, and when done pile them on a plate, and put a layer of jelly
between.




                             _Jelly Cake._
                             Recipe No. 2.


_Take_: Sugar, ½ lb.; butter, 6 oz.; eggs, 8; flour, 1 lb.; lemon, 1;
jelly.

Stir together till white half a pound of rolled sugar and six ounces of
butter; beat eight eggs to a froth, stir them into the butter and sugar,
and add a pound of flour; add the juice and grated rind of a fresh
lemon; turn this mixture into scolloped tin plates that have been well
buttered. Bake and arrange as in No. 1.




                              _Lady Cake._


_Take_: Sugar, 1 lb.; butter, 6 oz.; eggs, whites of 12; flour, ¾ lb.;
lemon, or bitter almond.

Stir together one pound of sugar and six ounces of butter; add the
whites of twelve eggs whipped to a froth, and three quarters of a pound
of flour; flavor with bitter almond or with the juice and grated rind of
one lemon. Bake in square shallow tins, and flavor the frosting with
vanilla.




                             _Lemon Cake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Sugar, 3 cupfuls; butter, one cupful; milk, 1 cupful; eggs, 5;
soda, 1 teaspoonful; flour, 4 cupfuls; lemons, 2.

Beat three cups of sugar and one of butter to a light cream; add one cup
of milk, five eggs beaten to a froth, one teaspoonful of soda, four cups
of flour, and the juice and grated rind of two lemons. Beat together
thoroughly and bake in a moderately quick oven.




                             _Lemon Cake._
                             Recipe No. 2.


_Take_: Sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ¾ lb.; eggs, 7; flour, 1 lb.; lemons, 2;
currants, 1½ teacupfuls.

Beat one pound of sugar and three quarters of a pound of butter to a
cream; add the yolks of seven eggs beaten to a froth and strained; whip
the whites up stiff and stir them in with one pound of dried flour, the
juice of one lemon and the peel of two cut into strips, and a cupful and
a half of currants. The currants may be left out if desired. Bake in a
moderately quick oven.




                              _Loaf Cake._


_Take_: Brown sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ¾ lb.; sour milk, 1 pt.; molasses, 1
pt.; eggs, 5; soda, 2 teaspoonfuls; flour, 3 lbs.; currants, 2 lbs.;
raisins (seeded), 1 lb.; cloves, allspice, and cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful
each; nutmeg, 1 (grated).

Beat together a pound of brown sugar and three quarters of a pound of
butter; add a pint of sour milk, a pint of molasses, five eggs beaten to
a froth, two teaspoonfuls of soda, one teaspoonful each of cloves,
allspice, and cinnamon, one grated nutmeg, and three pounds of flour.
Mix well, and then stir in two pounds of currants, carefully washed, and
one pound of seeded raisins. Bake in a moderately quick oven.




                              _Macaroons._
                                Almond.


_Take_: Almonds, ½ lb.; rose-water, 1 tablespoonful; eggs, whites of 3;
white sugar (_powdered_), ½ lb.

Soak the almonds in boiling-hot water till the skin will rub off easily;
wipe them dry, removing the skins, and pound to a paste with the
rose-water. Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, stir the sugar
in gradually, and then add the almonds. When the almonds are well mixed
in, drop the mixture by spoonfuls upon buttered baking plates or
letter-paper, several inches apart, sift sugar on them, and bake to a
light brown in a slow oven; it will take fifteen to twenty minutes.

If desired, substitute an ounce or more of bitter almonds for the sweet.




                              _Macaroons._
                               Cocoanut.


Rasp a fresh cocoanut, spread it on a dish or tin, and let it dry
gradually for two days; add to it double its weight of fine sifted
sugar, and the whites of eight eggs (beaten to a stiff froth), to the
pound. Roll the mixture into small balls, place them on a buttered tin,
and bake in a very slow oven twenty minutes. Move them from the tin
while they are warm, and store in a perfectly dry canister as soon as
cold.




                              _Macaroons._
                                Filbert.


Heat a quarter of a pound of filbert meats till the skin will rub off;
when cold, pound to a paste with a little white of egg; add a quarter of
a pound of sifted white sugar and the white of one egg; mix well, and
bake on buttered tins.




                            _Mountain Cake._


Mix together three quarters of a pound of sugar, half a pound of butter,
one pound of flour, the yolks of six eggs, and whites of four beaten to
a froth, one teacupful of milk, one teaspoonful of soda, and two of
cream-tartar; flavor with vanilla. For a jelly to put over the top, beat
together the whites of eggs left over, one pound of sugar, and a cupful
of currant jelly.




                              _Nut Cake._


_Take_: Sugar, 1½ cupfuls; butter, ½ cupful; eggs, 3; milk, ½ cupful;
flour, 2½ cupfuls; cream-tartar, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ½ teaspoonful;
hickory-nut meats (or any other kind), 1 cupful.

Beat together one and a half cupfuls of coffee-sugar, half a cupful of
butter, and three eggs, to a light froth; add alternately the half cup
of milk in which the soda has been dissolved, and the two and a half
cups of flour with which the cream-tartar has been sifted; add the half
cupful of nuts and bake in one loaf.




                             _Orange Cake._


_Take_: Flour, 1 lb., lacking 3 even tablespoonfuls; sugar, 1 lb.;
butter, ¼ lb.; sweet milk, ½ pt.; baking powder, 1½ even tablespoonfuls;
eggs, 5.

Cream the butter with the sugar, adding enough of the milk to make them
mix easily; add the yolks of the eggs and beat well, then add the milk,
the beaten whites of the eggs and the flour in which the baking powder
has been well mixed. Spread one third of an inch deep in jelly-cake
pans, and bake in a very quick oven. Make this icing: Whites of three
eggs, beaten stiff, one pound and a quarter of powdered sugar; grated
rind, soft pulp and juice of two large sour oranges and one lemon. Add
sugar for outside icing.




                              _Plum Cake._


_Take_: Flour, 1½ lbs.; butter, 1 lb.; sugar, 1 lb.; currants, ½ lb.;
candied citron, ½ lb.; orange peel, ½ lb.; sweet almonds, 2 oz.;
allspice, ½ oz.; cinnamon ½ oz.; eggs, 10.

Beat the sugar and butter to a light cream; add the allspice and pounded
cinnamon; work in the yolks of the eggs, two at a time; whip the whites
till they are highly frothed, and work them in, keeping the paste warm,
or it may become heavy. Cut the citron and orange peel into strips; mix
them with the currants (previously well washed and dried before the
fire), and also with the almonds; stir in by degrees the flour. Beat the
whole together thoroughly, and bake 1½ hours in a moderate oven. There
should be a couple sheets of paper both under and over the cake.




                             _Pound Cake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: White sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ¾ lb.; eggs, 8; flour, 1 lb.; lemon
or nutmeg.

Stir one pound of fine white sugar, and three quarters of a pound of
butter to a light cream; add eight eggs, the whites and yolks beaten
separately to a froth, and one pound of flour; flavor to taste with
lemon or nutmeg. Cover with icing as soon as done.




                             _Pound Cake._
                             Recipe No. 2.


_Take_: White sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ¾ lb.; eggs, 10; flour, 1 lb.;
currants, 1 teacupful; mace, ½ teaspoonful; nutmeg, ½ (grated).

Beat a pound of fine white sugar, and three quarters of a pound of
butter to a cream; beat up ten eggs, the whites and yolks separately;
add the yolks to the butter and sugar, half a teaspoonful of mace, and
half a grated nutmeg; mix well together, and add the whites of the eggs;
stir in a pound of flour thoroughly, and then add a teacupful of
currants, washed and dried. Bake in a rather quick oven.




                             _Quick Cake._


_Take_: Raised bread-dough, 1½ lbs.; butter, ½ lb.; sugar, ¾ lb.; eggs,
4; cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful; nutmeg, 1; milk, 1 teaspoonful; soda, ½
teaspoonful; raisins, (seeded), 1 lb.

Melt half a pound of butter, and when cool, work it into a pound and a
half of raised bread-dough. Beat four eggs and three quarters of a pound
of rolled sugar together, and mix with the dough; add a teaspoonful of
cinnamon, and a grated nutmeg. Dissolve half a teaspoonful of soda in a
teaspoonful of milk, strain it over the dough, and work the whole with
the hands for a quarter of an hour; then add a pound of seeded raisins,
and put it into cake pans. Let it stand in them until light before
putting it into the oven.




                            _Savory Cakes._


_Take_: White sugar, 1 lb.; eggs, 8; flour, 1 lb.; coriander seed, 2
tablespoonfuls; lemon 1.

Mix together a pound of powdered white sugar and eight eggs, the whites
and yolks beaten up separately; beat them well together for several
minutes, then add the grated rind of a fresh lemon and half the juice, a
pound of flour, and two tablespoonfuls of coriander seed. Drop this
batter by the large spoonful upon buttered baking pans, sift white sugar
over them and bake them immediately in a quick oven.




                             _Silver Cake._


_Take_: White sugar, 1 lb.; butter, ½ lb.; eggs, whites of 10; flour, ¾
lb.; essence bitter almonds, 1 teaspoonful.

Beat to a cream one pound of fine white sugar and half a pound of
butter; add the whites of ten eggs, whipped to a stiff froth; then add
three quarters of a pound of flour; flavor with one teaspoonful of the
essence of bitter almonds. Flavor the icing with rose-water.




                             _Spice Cakes._


_Take_: Butter, 1 teacupful; sugar, 1 teacupful; molasses, ½ teacupful;
soda, 1 teaspoonful; nutmeg, 1 (grated); ground ginger, cinnamon,
caraway seed, coriander seed, 1 teaspoonful each.

Melt a teacupful of butter, and mix it with a teacupful of sugar, and
half a teacupful of molasses; add a teaspoonful of cinnamon, a
teaspoonful of ground ginger, a grated nutmeg, and a teaspoonful each of
caraway and coriander seed; put in a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in
half a teacupful of warm water, stir in flour till stiff enough to roll
out thin; cut into cakes and bake them in a slow oven.




                             _Sponge Cake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Powdered sugar, 2 cupfuls; flour 1½ cupfuls; eggs, 7; lemon, the
grated rind and juice of one.

Beat the yolks of the eggs with the sugar until very light; add the rind
of the lemon and the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth; sift in
the flour and all the lemon juice, stirring as gently as possible.




                             _Sponge Cake._
                         Recipe No. 2. (White.)


_Take_: Sugar, 1½ cupfuls; flour, 1 cupful; eggs, whites of 10;
cream-tartar, 1 teaspoonful.

Take one and a half cupfuls of sugar, one cupful of flour, the whites of
ten eggs, and one teaspoonful of cream-tartar. Beat the eggs to a froth
and stir the sugar with them; put the cream-tartar in the flour, and
then stir the flour with the paste lightly and quickly. Do not stir the
cake after the flour is fairly in. Bake in a quick oven.




                        _Strawberry Shortcake._
                             Recipe No. 1.


_Take_: Flour, 1 qt.; eggs, 4; cream or melted butter, 1 teacupful;
milk; salt, 1 teaspoonful; strawberries; white sugar.

Mix a quart of flour with four beaten eggs, a teacupful of cream or
melted butter, and a teaspoonful of salt; add enough milk to roll it
out. Roll it out thin; line a shallow baking pan with part of it, put in
a thick layer of nice, ripe strawberries, and sprinkle in sufficient
white sugar to sweeten them; cover them with a thin layer of the crust;
then add another layer of strawberries and sugar, and cover the whole
with another layer of the crust. Bake in a quick oven about twenty-five
minutes.




                        _Strawberry Shortcake._
                             Recipe No. 2.


_Take_: A soda biscuit crust made with flour, 1 qt.; soda, 1
teaspoonful; cream-tartar, 2½ teaspoonfuls; butter, 3 oz.; sweet milk, 3
gills. This will make two cakes.

If the cake is to be served on a platter, roll the crust the shape and
size inside the rim; if a dinner plate is to be used, make the cakes
round. Roll the crust to the thickness of half an inch, prick and bake
in a quick oven. Have the strawberries cut in two or three pieces, split
the cakes, lay one half on the plate; butter it and put over it a thick
layer of strawberries and sugar; then replace the other half, upside
down, if there is to be another layer of fruit. Leave in the oven five
to ten minutes, and serve smoking hot.




                             _White Cake._


_Take_: Sugar, 2 cupfuls; butter, 1 cupful; milk, 1 cupful; eggs, whites
of 6; cream-tartar, 2 teaspoonfuls; soda, 1 teaspoonful; flour, 2
cupfuls; cornstarch, 1 cupful.

Beat together two cups of sugar and one of butter; add one cupful of
sweet milk, the whites of six eggs whipped to a froth, two teaspoonfuls
of cream-tartar, one of soda, two cupfuls of flour, and one of
cornstarch. Mix together thoroughly, and bake in a rather quick oven.




                          _Icing (for Cake)._
                             Recipe No. 1.


Beat the whites of three eggs to a froth _only_ (not until they are
_white_); add gradually one pound of powdered sugar while you continue
beating; this may be done in five minutes. Flavor with lemon or vanilla.
Beating the egg stiff before the sugar is added makes the icing slow in
drying. Ice the cake as soon as taken from the oven.




                          _Icing (for Cake)._
                             Recipe No. 2.


Place one pound of sugar (_double refined_) in a bowl with a level
teaspoonful of cream-tartar, and the whites of three eggs; beat with a
wooden spoon twenty minutes, when it should be very white and light, and
on letting it run from the spoon, preserve its thread-like appearance
three or four minutes. Invert the cake on a mould that is smaller than
the cake. Ice the sides with a broad-bladed knife; when dry, turn the
cake and cover the top by slowly pouring the icing on the center of the
cake.




                          _Icing (for Cake)._
                        Recipe No. 3. (Almond.)


Blanch fifteen ounces of Jordan, and one ounce of bitter almonds; pound
to a smooth fine paste, with two tablespoonfuls of orange-flower water;
then add one and a quarter pounds of sifted sugar, and the whites of
four eggs. Mix and pound well for eight or ten minutes; take it up in a
bowl. Pass a long band of paper, 2½ inches wide, around the sides of the
cake, leaving it 1 inch above the _top_; then make a layer of the icing,
place it in a slow oven thirty-five minutes without acquiring any color.
It may be served as it is, or be iced over, as in previous recipe.

    [Illustration: Page header]




                                 Index.


  General Directions                                                 3-6


                                   A
  Almond                                                               7


                                   C
  Caraway                                                              8
  Chocolate                                                            9
  Cocoanut                                                         10-13
  Coffee                                                              14
  Cornstarch                                                          15
  Cream                                                           16, 17
  Cup                                                             18, 19
  Currant                                                             20


                                   D
  Delicate                                                            21


                                   F
  Fancy                                                               22
  Fruit                                                               23


                                   G
  Gingerbread                                                      24-29
  Ginger Snaps                                                    30, 31
  Golden                                                              32


                                   H
  Huckleberry                                                         33


                                   I
  Icings                                                          57, 59


                                   J
  Jelly                                                           34, 35


                                   L
  Lady                                                                36
  Lemon                                                           37, 38
  Loaf                                                                39


                                   M
  Macaroons:
      Almond                                                          40
      Cocoanut                                                        41
      Filbert                                                         41
  Mountain                                                            42


                                   N
  Nut                                                                 43


                                   O
  Orange                                                              44


                                   P
  Plum                                                                45
  Pound                                                           46, 47


                                   Q
  Quick                                                               48


                                   S
  Savory                                                              49
  Silver                                                              50
  Spice                                                               51
  Sponge                                                          52, 53
  Strawberry Shortcake                                            54, 55


                                   W
  White                                                               56

    [Illustration: Decorative page footer]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 65572 ***
