
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Kansas University science bulletin,
Vol. I, No. 7,  September 1902

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms 
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online 
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, 
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located 
before using this eBook.


Title: The Kansas University science bulletin, Vol. I, No. 7,  September
1902

Editor: Various

Release Date: August 27, 2023 [eBook #71501]

Language: English

Credits: Richard Tonsing amd the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
         at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
         made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KANSAS UNIVERSITY SCIENCE
BULLETIN, VOL. I, NO. 7,  SEPTEMBER 1902 ***





                                  THE
                           KANSAS UNIVERSITY
                           SCIENCE BULLETIN.
                     Vol. I, No. 7—September 1902.
                    (Whole Series, Vol. XI, No. 7.)

                                CONTENTS:

 COAL MEASURES FAUNAL STUDIES, II (Beede and Rogers)—FAUNA OF THE SHAWNEE
     FORMATION (Haworth), THE WABAUNSEE FORMATION (Prosser), and THE
                   COTTONWOOD LIMESTONE, _J. W. Beede_.


                       PUBLISHED BY THE UNIVERSITY,

                              LAWRENCE, KAN.


                     Price of this number, 25 cents.

      Entered at the post-office in Lawrence as second-class matter.




                  KANSAS UNIVERSITY SCIENCE BULLETIN.


 VOL. I, NO. 7.             SEPTEMBER, 1902.     { WHOLE SERIES,
                                                 { VOL. XI, NO. 7.




                   COAL MEASURES FAUNAL STUDIES, II.

                 (BY J. W. BEEDE AND AUSTIN F. ROGERS.)


               FAUNA OF THE SHAWNEE FORMATION (HAWORTH),
                   THE WABAUNSEE FORMATION (PROSSER),
                       THE COTTONWOOD LIMESTONE.

                            BY J. W. BEEDE.

Being a continuation of the foregoing lists of Rogers, published in this
journal, vol. IX, No. 4, pp. 232–254.[1]

The present paper deals with the fauna of the rocks, beginning at the
base of what Haworth has called the “Shawnee formation”[2] and
continuing upward to the top of the Cottonwood limestone. The strata are
treated in ascending order. It must be borne in mind that it is the
object of these papers to bring out the fauna of the rocks of the Kansas
Coal Measures in sufficient detail to establish time divisions on a
paleontological basis. These lists are, of course, incomplete for the
horizons _in toto_, but it is hoped that they do give the characteristic
fossils of the rocks of the Kansas river section in sufficient fulness
to warrant some deductions of value. The fauna of the Lower Coal
Measures still remains to be completed.


=20.= KANWAKA SHALES (Adams MSS., by permission U. S. Geological
Survey). Bennett’s description:[3] “Above the last (Oread) limestone
lies a heavy shale deposit, at least ninety-seven feet thick at
Lecompton. The lower sixty-five feet of this is a clay shale, then
sixteen feet of arenaceous shale, then five feet of sand rock, above
which lies eleven feet of sandy buff shales.” No fossils known from this
horizon.


=21.= LECOMPTON LIMESTONE. Bennett’s description: “Capping the hills
around Lecompton is a five-foot limestone in two layers, which we will
provisionally name the ‘Fusulina’ limestone; not that it alone bears
that fossil, but because of the abundance of _Fusulina_ in it. It is the
lower of another triple system [formation] of limestones, the members of
which are separated by a few feet of shale, and which retain this order
as far as observed to the west. Above the ‘Fusulina’ stratum are five
and one-half feet of clay shales, then one and one-fourth feet of blue
limestone, which weathers dark buff, like all its associate strata.
Above this are four feet of shales having a bituminous streak in the
middle; then ten feet of light gray, easily disintegrated limestone.
This group [formation] may be called the Lecompton limestone, on account
of their outcropping being near Lecompton. At Spencer, six miles west of
Lecompton, the upper part of the series [formation] finally disappears
below the alluvial soils of the valley.”

From near the horizon of the above formation, from a well in the road in
the bed of Deer creek (the one emptying into Wakarusa creek), near the
Shawnee-Douglas county line, the following species have been collected:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Campophyllum torquium_ Owen.

_Archæocidaris_ cf. _agassizi_ Hall.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fenestella limbata remota_ Foerste.

_Pinnatopora_ sp.

_Polypora distincta_ Ulrich?

_Polypora elliptica_ Rogers? It is quite probable that this is a
distinct species. It has fenestrules arranged in two intersecting series
when viewed on the reverse side, and the branches are not striated. The
fenestrules appear nearly square on account of their arrangement, but in
reality they are subcircular. On the obverse side the nodes are very
prominent and some of them appear to possess acanthopores.

_Polypora_ cf. _nodocarinata_ Ulrich.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Chonotes granulifer_ Owen.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Aviculopecten carboniferus_ (Stevens) Meek.

_Aviculopecten maccoyi_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) White.

_Limopteria gibbosa_ (Meek and Worthen).


=22.= TECUMSEH SHALES. A stratum of shales about seventy-five feet in
thickness, nearly non-fossiliferous, of fine texture, containing
abundant ferruginous concretions and occasional layers of soft shaly
sandstone. According to Bennett, these may represent the Kanwaka
shales.[4]


=23.= DEER CREEK LIMESTONE.[4] Three layers of limestone separated by
layers of shale. The total thickness of the formation is fifteen to
twenty-five feet. The principal stratum is the uppermost, which is from
seven to twelve feet thick. Most of the fossils below are collected from
this upper layer. It is a massive, light gray limestone, tinged with
yellow. The texture often varies much in a short distance, grading into
inclusions or banks of blue argillaceous limestone in which the fossils
are excellently preserved. It is best exposed at Calhoun’s Bluffs, in
the cut of the Union Pacific railroad three miles northeast of Topeka.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Archæocidaris agassizi_ Hall.

_Oligoporus minutus_ Beede.

_Crinoid_ stems.

_Fenestella hexagonalis_ Rogers?

_Fenestella_ sp.

_Pinnatopora pyriformis_ Rogers.

_Polypora distincta_ Ulrich? Probably a new species. It differs from
this species in having fenestrules broader and shorter and slightly more
slender branches. However, this may be due in a large part to the
particular portion of the zoarium of which our specimens are fragments.

_Polypora nodocarinata_ Ulrich.

_Septopora pinnata_ Ulrich.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Crania modesta_ White?

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Derbya keokuk_ (Hall and Clarke).

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus costatus_ Sowerby? de Koninck.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argintia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten_ sp.

_Entolium aviculatum_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Myalina kansasensis_ Shumard?

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Pinna subspatulata_ Worthen?

_Bellerophon crassus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Trachydomia wheeleri_ (Swallow) Keyes.

_Pleurotomaria tabulata_ Hall.

_Conularia crustula_ White? (Very large for this species.)


=24.= CALHOUN SHALES. This formation is fifty to sixty-five feet in
thickness. The lower part is a layer of soft argillaceous sandstone from
twelve to twenty feet thick. The upper portion of the formation is a
bluish shale, arenaceous below, clayey above, and of comparatively fine
texture. No fossils have been collected from this formation, except a
few fragments of _Calamites_ and _Cordaites_ in a soft sandstone
immediately beneath the Topeka limestone, in the eastern part of that
city. The type exposure is at Calhoun’s Bluffs, three miles northeast of
Topeka.


=25.= HARTFORD (TOPEKA) LIMESTONE. (Adams’s MSS., by permission of U. S.
Geological Survey.) The following section of the rocks is about as given
by Doctor Bennett when he first described them:

                                                                 ft. in.
 _g._ Limestone weathering buff                                    2   0
 _f._ Drab shales                                                  3   0
 _e._ Limestone weathering buff                                    1   6
 _d._ Buff calcareous shales with abundant fossils                 2   0
 _c._ Blue to brown limestone, always weathering to a brown        5   8
        buff, cherty near the top, fossiliferous
 _b._ Blue shales                                                  1   6
 _a._ Blue limestone, weathering dark buff                         6   0
                                                                 --- ---
                  Total thickness of formation                    21   8

Most of the fossils enumerated below were taken from layers _c_ and _d_,
though the entire set is more or less fossiliferous, with about the same
species running through them.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Amblysiphonella prosseri_ Clarke.

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Crinoid_ stems and plates, referred by Bennett to _Zeacrinus
mucrospinus_ and _Z. acanthophorus_.

_Archæocidaris agassizi_ Hall.

_Archæocidaris trudifer_ White.

_Worm._

_Fenestella shumardi_ Prout.

_Fenestella remota_ Foerste.

_Polypora elliptica_ Rogers.

_Polypora submarginata_ Meek.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Septopora biserialis_ (Swallow) Foerste.

_Septopora_ sp.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Derbya keokuk_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Orbiculoidea missouriensis_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus costatus_ Sowerby? de Koninck.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby?

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Astartella vera_ Hall.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Entolium aviculatum_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Limopteria marian_ (White) Beede?

_Macrodon_ Cf. _tenuistriatus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Macrodon_ sp.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Schizodus curtus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Schizodus curtiformis_ Wolcott.

_Schizodus rossicus_ de Verneuil.

_Aclisina swalloviana_ (Geinitz) Meek, and other gastropods too poorly
preserved to be identified.

_Bellerophon carbonarius_ Cox.

_Orthoceras_ sp.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Worthen) Vogdes.

=26.= SEVERY SHALES. These shales are blue below, varying through yellow
to black in places above the coal. They are fifty to seventy-five feet
in thickness. The texture varies, and in the upper part they contain the
Osage coal, which is mined at Topeka, Burlingame, Osage City, and other
places.

In correlating isolated sections the rocks between the Topeka limestone
and the Barclay (= Burlingame = Wyckoff, etc.) limestone have been
somewhat confused. Under the title, “Stratigraphy of the Kansas Coal
Measures,”[5] Haworth describes them as follows: “Above them (Topeka
limestones) lies another shale bed fifty feet thick, at the top of which
lies the Topeka coal, a seam about eleven inches thick, which has been
mined in different places. The coal is immediately overlaid by two thin
limestone beds, separated by less than three feet of shales. Above the
limestone is the Osage City shale, more than 100 feet thick, at the top
of which is the Osage coal, averaging eighteen or twenty inches
thick.... Above the Osage coal is a thin limestone system [formation],
superseded in turn by the Burlingame shales, a body about 150 feet thick
in the vicinity of Burlingame, and possibly more in places. Both the
Burlingame and Osage City shales extend for long distances to the
southwest and northeast, and are important landmarks in stratigraphy.”
Bennett[6] describes the succession at Topeka correctly, but supposes
the coal above the Topeka coal corresponds to the Osage horizon, instead
of to the one already indicated in this paper as its equivalent.

Haworth’s statement in Vol. I, p. 162, of the Kansas Survey, is
practically a repetition of the one just quoted, but he corrects the
correlation of the coals in a foot-note at the bottom of page 161. In
volume III of the same reports (p. 94) he uses the term “Osage shales”
for all the shales between the Topeka limestone and the Barclay
limestone. The section is correctly given by Hall in his “Section from
Boicourt to Alma,”[7] though it is not clear just what is meant by his
“Osage City Shales, Coal, and Limestone.”

From the foregoing, it will be seen that the terms “Osage City” and
“Burlingame,” when strictly applied, are proposed for one and the same
set of rocks, namely, those above the Osage-Topeka coal, while the
shales below the coal and above the Hartford limestone are not
designated at all. Later, in Vol. III of the University Survey (p. 66),
in quoting Doctor Adams’s notes, Professor Haworth gives the following:
“_Severy Shales._—‘Above the Elk Falls limestone is a bed of shales
averaging fifty to seventy-five feet in thickness, which, with the
protected limestones above, forms a light escarpment that may be traced
from a few miles below Eureka to Cedar valley, forming a line from two
to five miles west of the Elk Falls escarpment. This shale bed is
therefore sufficiently prominent to be recognized in the field, and to
be of considerable local and stratigraphic importance. The town of
Severy lies within it, and therefore it may be called the Severy
shales.’” Dr. George I. Adams, of the United States Geological Survey,
under whose direction the work of correlating the Coal Measures rocks of
Kansas was done last summer, informs me that the names used in this
paper and accredited to him have been passed upon by the committee on
nomenclature, and he has kindly permitted me to use them in advance.

So far as known these shales are not fossiliferous, save for a few
fragments of fern leaves, below the coal, but are very fossiliferous
locally just above it.

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Ceriocrinus craigi_ (Worthen) Wachsmuth and Springer.

_Ceriocrinus harshbargeri_ Beede.

_Ceriocrinus hemisphericus_ (Shumard) Wachsmuth and Springer. These
three species of crinoids are from the dump, and may be from the shales
between the two layers of the Howard limestone above.

_Spirorbis_ sp.

_Fenestella dentata_ Rogers.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fenestella mimica_ Ulrich.

_Pinnatopora elliptica_ Rogers.

_Polypora whitei_ Foerste.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes glaber_ Geinitz.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Lingula umbonata_ Cox. If this species is considered separate from _L.
mytiloides_, the specimens here referred to would probably be classed
with the latter.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Productus symmetricus_ McChesney.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Astartella vera_ Hall.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_? Aviculopecten whitei_ Meek?

_Cardiomorpha missouriensis_ Shumard?

_Edmondia_ sp.

_? Myalina exasperata_ Beede.

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Nucula ventricosa_ Hall.

_Pleurophorus tropidopherus_ Meek.

_Schizodus curtus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Schizodus_ sp.

_Solenomya radiata_ Meek and Worthen.

_Sedgwickia topekensis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon_ Cf. _bellus_ Keyes.

_Euomphalus subrugosus_ (Meek and Worthen) Meek.

_Pleurotomaria perhumerosa_ Meek.

_Pleurotomaria sphærulata_ Conrad.

_Pleurotomaria subdecussata_ Geinitz.

_Orthoceras cribosum_ Geinitz.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Worthen) Vogdes.

=27.= HOWARD LIMESTONE. This consists of two thin layers of limestone
separated by two to ten feet of shales. The lower of these is a hard,
blue limestone from twenty inches to two feet in thickness, quite
fossiliferous in places, and sometimes quite full of crinoid stems and
of fish teeth. The upper layer is usually coarser and more shaly. The
clay between them is often very fossiliferous.

From Doctor Adams’s notes, published by Professor Haworth,[8] it will be
seen that the Howard limestone is the same as the rock over the Osage
coal, and that his Severy shale is the same as the Osage City shales.

Some of the fossils here listed were collected from ballast near
Lawrence, on the old Carbondale railroad, which was taken from this
layer of rock at Carbondale. These references are marked with an
asterisk.

* _Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

* _Campophyllum torquium_ Owen.

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

* _Lophophyllum westii_ Beede.

_Ceriocrinus monticulatus_ Beede.

_Erisocrinus megalobrachius_ Beede.

_Scaphiocrinus washburni_ Beede.

_Spirorbis_ sp.

* _Chainodictyon laxum_ Foerste.

_Fenestella dentata_ Rogers.

_Fenestella remota_ Foerste.

* _Fenestella shumardi_ Prout.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Pinnatopora pyriformipora_ Rogers?

_Pinnatopora tenuilineata_ (Meek) Ulrich.

_Polypora aspera_ Rogers.

_Polypora elliptica_ Rogers.

* _Polypora_ sp.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Streblotrypa prisca_ Gabb and Horn.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes glaber_ Geinitz.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Derbya keokuk_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus costatus_ Sowerby? de Koninck.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma costatum_ Meek and Worthen.

_Allorisma geinitzi_ Meek.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Allorisma kansasensis_ Beede.

_Aviculopecten carboniferus_ (Stevens) Meek.

_Aviculopecten hertzeri_ Meek.

_Aviculopecten maccoyi_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopinna americana_ Meek.

_Edmondia aspenwallensis_ Meek.

_Edmondia nebraskensis_ (Geinitz) Meek.

_Entolium aviculatum_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Lima retifera_ Shumard.

_Limopteria gibbosa_ (Meek and Worthen).

_Macrodon_ cf. _tenuistriata_ (Geinitz) Meek and Worthen.

_Modiola subelliptica_ Meek.

_Myalina kansasensis_ Shumard.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Nucula?_ sp. (cast, very small).

_Nuculana bellistriata attenuata_ Meek var.

_Pinna lata_ Beede.

_Placunopsis carbonaria_ Meek and Worthen.

_? Pseudomonotis hawni equistriata_ Beede var.?

* _Pteria longa_ (Geinitz).

_Schizodus alpina_ (Hall) Keyes.

_Schizodus circulus_ Worthen.

_Schizodus wheeleri_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Yoldia subscitula_ Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon carbonaria_ Cox.

_Bellerophon crassus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Bellerophon montfortianus_ Norwood and Pratten.

* _Bellerophon percarinatus_ Conrad.

_Bulimorpha nitidula_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_Capulus parvus_ Swallow.

_Pleurotomaria illinoiensis_ Worthen? Differs from this species in being
much smaller and in having a larger number of nodes to the whorl. The
notch in the lip extends back some distance as a thin, almost linear
slit.

_Pleurotomaria tabulata_ Conrad.

_Soleniscus_ sp.

_Sphærodoma medialis_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_Sphærodoma ponderosa_ (Swallow) Keyes?

_Sphærodoma_ sp.

_Strophostylus nana_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_? Glyphæoceras_ sp. (Two specimens, very small and not so preserved as
to be well identified.)

* _Goniatites subcavus_ Miller and Gurley.

* _Metacoceras sangamonensis_ (Meek and Worthen) Hyatt.

* _Nautilus planovolvis_ Shumard.

_Orthoceras_ Cf. _rushensis_ McChesney. Pittings on part of the surface.

_Solenocheilus_ Cf. _collectus_ Hyatt.

_Stearoceras gibbosum_ Hyatt? Perhaps a young specimen of this species,
though it will probably prove to be different. The cast preserves a fine
line down the center of the ventral surface which disappears before
reaching the deep sinus. The sinus is somewhat shallower than that
figured by Hyatt, and it may be an _Endolobus_.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Worthen) Vogdes.

=28.= BURLINGAME SHALES. Olive shales, generally very argillaceous,
though arenaceous in streaks, and in places even contain sandstone.
These shales are 120 feet or more in thickness, and for the most part
are not fossiliferous, though in places fossils are very abundant. In
the upper part is the Dover-Silver Lake coal, and above it usually a
layer of impure limestone.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Lingula umbonata_ Cox. (See previous note to this species.)

_Orbiculoidea missouriensis_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten whitei_ Meek?

_Myalina congeneris_ Walcott?

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Nucula?_ sp.

_Nuculana bellistriata attenuata_ Meek var.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Pleurophorus_ Cf. _angulatus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Pleurophorus tropidopherus_ Meek.

_Pseudomonotis hawni_ Meek.

_Sedgwickia topekensis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon carbonarius_ Cox.

_Bellerophon marcouianus_ Geinitz.

_Dentalium meekianum_ Geinitz.

_Euomphalus subrugosus_ (Meek and Worthen) Meek.

_Gastropod_, minute, undetermined.

_Pleurotomaria subdecussata_ Geinitz.

_Ostracoda._

=29.= BARCLAY LIMESTONE. (Adams, MSS., by permission of U. S. Geological
Survey.) Base of the Wabaunsee formation. For the present it seems best
to group several strata in this formation.[9] They cannot well be mapped
on the scale of the U. S. folios, and they are also intimately connected
faunally, and usually all assist in producing a high escarpment with the
upper part retreating. The rocks aggregate about seventy feet in
thickness. The following section will serve to give an idea of these
rocks:

                                                                 ft. in.
 _g._ Gray, argillaceous, fossiliferous limestone, from 1 foot     2   0
        to
 _f._ Bluish calcareous shales with _Enteletes_, _Myalina_,       20   0
        _Allorisma_ and _Bellerophon_ fauna, from 8 feet to
 _e._ Hard, shelly, bluish limestone                               4   0
 _d._ Shales with thin limestones, varying from 21 feet to        40   0
 _c._ Hard gray limestone weathering light yellow, from 1½ feet    1   0
        to
 _b._ Thin layer of shale                                          0   6
 _a._ Massive yellowish-gray limestone, very hard, with but few    6   0
        fossils, from 4 to 7 feet thick, averaging about

Most all of the fossils listed below are from layers _e_, _f_, and _g_,
by far the greater part ranging through all three.

_Somphospongia multiformis_ Beede (from Robinson, Brown county).

_Aulacorhynchus millepunctatus_ (Meek and Worthen) Hall and Clarke?

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

_Allorisma costatum_ Meek and Worthen.

_Allorisma geinitzi_ Meek.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Meek.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Allorisma_ sp.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Edmondia aspenwallensis_ Meek.

_Edmondia ovata_ Meek and Worthen.

_Edmondia_ cf. _nebraskensis_ Meek.

_Macrodon_ sp.

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina subquadrata_ Shumard.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Pleurophorus_ sp.

_Pseudomonotis kansasensis_ Beede.

_Pseudomonotis hawni_ Meek and Hayden.

_Pseudomonotis_ cf. _robusta_ Beede.

_? Sedgwickia altirostrata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon carbonarius_ Cox.

_Bellerophon marcouianus_ Geinitz.

_Bellerophon_ cf. _montfortianus_ Norwood and Pratten.

_Bellerophon percarinatus_ Conrad.

_Bulimorpha nitidula_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_Capulus_ sp.

_Soleniscus paludinæformis_ (Hall) White.

_Sphærodoma texana_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Orthoceras_ sp.

_Tainoceras occidentalis_ (Swallow) Hyatt?

=30.= WILLARD SHALES. These shales are fifty-five feet thick in their
thinnest exposure, and are thicker in some places. Bennett gives their
thickness at Willard at from seventy-five to eighty-five feet, including
a thin stratum of limestone.[10] The Bennett collection contains the
following specimens taken from this thin limestone:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say) Fischer.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Bellerophon_ sp.

=31.= CHOCOLATE LIMESTONE. This name, as well as the one preceding and
the one following, are used merely for convenience here, as they have
been used before for the designation of these rocks, knowing that with
further study and careful tracing they will be found to be the
equivalents of similar rocks on the Neosho river section. This limestone
is buff brown in color, varying from seven to ten feet in thickness,
composed principally of two layers of massive stone, the upper of which
is composed largely of the large variety of _Fusulina secalica_. In the
Kansas river region it always forms high escarpments with rocky edges.
It is not rich in any fossils except the _Fusulinas_.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

=32.= Shales and sandstones shown near Dover, eighty-five feet in
thickness, varying from light yellow to brownish red.

=33.= DOVER LIMESTONE. A limestone about four feet in thickness and of
grayish color.

=34.= Somewhere from forty to seventy feet of shales, with occasional
thin limestones with _Myalina perattenuata_.

=35.= Ten to twelve inches of very fossiliferous limestone in thin
layers. Numbers 32 to 35 are as exposed on Mission creek and its
tributaries near Dover. Number 35 is shown in ravines southwest of
Dover, in the high region east and south of Mission creek.

_Fenestella_ sp.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Aviculopecten maccoyi_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Edmondia_ sp.

_Limopteria marian_ (White) Beede.

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Pseudomonotis hawni_ Meek and Hayden.

_Pseudomonotis_ cf. _kansasensis_ Beede.

_Schizodus_ sp.

_Schizodus_ sp.

_Gastropod_ cast.

_Loxonema_ sp.

_Pleurotomaria perhumerosa_ Meek.

=36.= Owing to lack of detailed study of the rocks from the last
described to the Cottonwood limestone, it will be necessary to combine
the less important strata into groups and mention only the more
important. It is a matter of regret that the rocks of this part of the
Kansas river section cannot be referred with certainty to the
corresponding rocks of the Neosho river and Cottonwood river sections,
which have been studied by various geologists. As near as I am able to
judge, No. 13 of Bennett’s Buffalo Mound section[11] corresponds to the
Americus limestone near Emporia.[12] All the rocks between No. 35 and
No. 13 of Bennett’s Buffalo Mound section are put under No. 36. They
consist of an alternation of thin limestones and shales. These shales
form a part, at least, of the “Olpe” shales of Dr. Geo. I. Adams (by
permission, from his MSS.)

=37.= No. 13 of Bennett’s Buffalo Mound section. Probably is the
equivalent of the Americus limestone before mentioned.

=38.= ELMDALE FORMATION. Prosser and Beede, MSS. Shales with occasional
thin limestones, quite fossiliferous in the lower portion. This is
probably the same horizon as No. 2 and No. 3, except the limestone at
the top, of Prosser’s Manhattan section.[13] It is also, in all
probability, the same horizon as No. 8 of my section on the South Fork
of the Black Vermillion river.[14] However, the fossils from the latter
place are given in a separate list. The thickness of these shales on the
Kansas river and Mill creek are from 111 to 118 feet. Grouping the Mill
creek and the Manhattan equivalents, we have the fossils of this horizon
as follows:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Chætetes?_ sp.

_Crinoid_ stems and plates.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Dichotrypa subramosa_ Rogers, MSS.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Septopora biserialis_ (Swallow) Foerste.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes glaber_ Geinitz.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Crania modesta_ White?

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Lingula umbonata_ Cox.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Orbiculoidea manhattanensis_ (Meek and Hayden) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Productus symmetricus_ McChesney.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Rhipidomella pecosi_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Swallow) Meek and Hayden.

_Nuculana bellistriata attenuata_ Meek var.

_Dawsonella meeki_ Brady? (Prosser’s identification.)

_Griffithides_ sp.


From about the same horizon on the South Fork of the Black Vermillion:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Dichotrypa subramosa_ Rogers, MSS.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Septopora_ sp.

_Thamniscus octonarius_ Ulrich.

_Crinoid_ stems.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Rhipidomella pecosi_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Allorisma subcuneata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Chænomya_ sp.

_Pleurophorus whitei_ Beede.

_? Sedgwickia altirostrata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Euomphalus subrugosus_ (Meek and Worthen) Meek.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Hayden) Vogdes.

=39.= NEVA LIMESTONE. Prosser and Beede, MSS. This is the “dry bone”
limestone of Swallow.[15] It is a gray limestone six or eight feet in
thickness, in two layers, separated by a layer of shale. It weathers
very rough, from which fact Swallow called it the “dry bone” limestone.

=40.= ESKRIDGE SHALES. Prosser, MSS. About thirty feet of shales between
the above and the base of the Cottonwood limestone.

=41.= COTTONWOOD LIMESTONE. Six feet of light buff-gray limestone, in
two layers, the upper usually somewhat cherty, and filled with a small
form of _Fusulina secalica_ (Say). An excellent dimension stone, of wide
distribution. Fossils rare.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Cystodictia inequimarginata_ Rogers.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fenestella remota_ Foerste.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Pinnatopora_ sp.

_Rhabdomeson americanus_ Rogers.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Septopora biserialis_ (Swallow) Foerste.

_Streblotrypa prisca_ Gabb and Horn.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Pinna_ sp.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Hayden) Vogdes.


 GEOLOGICAL LABORATORY, INDIANA UNIVERSITY,
                 JUNE 14, 1902.

-----

Footnote 1:

  In justice to Mr. Rogers, it should be stated that he did not see the
  proof of the first article and is not to blame for the very bad errors
  which it contains.

Footnote 2:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., III, pp. 93, 94, 1898.

Footnote 3:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., I, p. 116, 1896.

Footnote 4:

  “Deer Creek Limestone,” Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., II, p. 117.

Footnote 5:

  Kans. Univ. Quart., III, p. 278, 1895.

Footnote 6:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., I, pp. 118, 119, 1896.

Footnote 7:

  Ibid., p. 394.

Footnote 8:

  Ibid., pp. 66, 67.

Footnote 9:

  For a more detailed description of these rocks, see Trans. Kans. Acad.
  Sci., XV, p. 30.

Footnote 10:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., I, pp. 119, 120, 1896.

Footnote 11:

  Ibid., p. 120.

Footnote 12:

  Ibid., p. 80. See, also, Smith, Bull. Geol. Lyon Co. (Kans.), Emporia,
  1901.

Footnote 13:

  Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., VI, p. 33.

Footnote 14:

  Kans. Univ. Quart., IX, p. 193, 1901. (For July, 1900.)

Footnote 15:

  See discussion in Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., VI, p. 33 and p. 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KANSAS UNIVERSITY SCIENCE
BULLETIN, VOL. I, NO. 7,  SEPTEMBER 1902 ***



Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.


Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK


To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.


1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:


  
    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  


1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.


1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:


    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.


1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.


1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.


1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.


Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.


The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.


The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.


While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.


International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.


Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.


Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.


This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

